---
layout: article
title: Abstracts reading -- ASPLOS 2017
key: 2018110901
lang: en
tags: [ASPLOS, abstract]
modify_date: 2018-11-10
hidden: true
---

## 24th International Conference on Architectural Support for  Programming Languages and Operating Systems

<!--more-->


### Session 1: ASPLOS Highlights I

#### Determining Application-specific Peak Power and Energy Requirements for Ultra-low-power Processors

#### Prophet: Precise QoS Prediction on Non-Preemptive Accelerators to Improve Utilization in Warehouse Scale

#### Mallacc: Accelerating Memory Allocation :star:
Recent work shows that dynamic memory allocation consumes nearly 7% of all cycles in Google datacenters. With the trend towards increased specialization of hardware, we propose Mallacc, an in-core hardware accelerator designed for broad use across a number of high-performance, modern memory allocators. The design of Mallacc is quite different from traditional throughput-oriented hardware accelerators. Because memory allocation requests tend to be very frequent, fast, and interspersed inside other application code, accelerators must be optimized for latency rather than throughput and area overheads must be kept to a bare minimum. Mallacc accelerates the three primary operations of a typical memory allocation request: size class computation, retrieval of a free memory block, and sampling of memory usage. Our results show that malloc latency can be reduced by up to 50% with a hardware cost of less than 1500 um2 of silicon area, less than 0.006% of a typical high-performance processor core.

### Session 2: ASPLOS Highlights II

#### REDSPY: Exploring Value Locality in Software :star:
Complex code bases with several layers of abstractions have abundant inefficiencies that affect the execution time. Value redundancy is a kind of inefficiency where the same values are repeatedly computed, stored, or retrieved over the course of execution. Not all redundancies can be easily detected or eliminated with compiler optimization passes due to the inherent limitations of the static analysis.

Microscopic observation of whole executions at instruction- and operand-level granularity breaks down abstractions and helps recognize redundancies that masquerade in complex programs. We have developed REDSPY---a fine-grained profiler to pinpoint and quantify redundant operations in program executions. Value redundancy may happen over time at same locations or in adjacent locations, and thus it has temporal and spatial locality. REDSPY identifies both temporal and spatial value locality. Furthermore, REDSPY is capable of identifying values that are approximately the same, enabling optimization opportunities in HPC codes that often use floating point computations. REDSPY provides intuitive optimization guidance by apportioning redundancies to their provenance---source lines and execution calling contexts. REDSPY pinpointed dramatically high volume of redundancies in programs that were optimization targets for decades, such as SPEC CPU2006 suite, Rodinia benchmark, and NWChem---a production computational chemistry code. Guided by REDSPY, we were able to eliminate redundancies that resulted in significant speedups.

#### Translation-Triggeered Prefetching :star:
We propose translation-enabled memory prefetching optimizations or TEMPO, a low-overhead hardware mechanism to boost memory performance by exploiting the operating system's (OS) virtual memory subsystem. We are the first to make the following observations: (1) a substantial fraction (20-40%) of DRAM references in modern big- data workloads are devoted to accessing page tables; and (2) when memory references require page table lookups in DRAM, the vast majority of them (98%+) also look up DRAM for the subsequent data access. TEMPO exploits these observations to enable DRAM row-buffer and on-chip cache prefetching of the data that page tables point to. TEMPO requires trivial changes to the memory controller (under 3% additional area), no OS or application changes, and improves performance by 10-30% and energy by 1-14%.

#### Typed Architectures: Architectual Support for Lightweight Scripting :star:
Dynamic scripting languages are becoming more and more widely adopted not only for fast prototyping but also for developing production-grade applications. They provide high-productivity programming environments featuring high levels of abstraction with powerful built-in functions, automatic memory management, object-oriented programming paradigm and dynamic typing. However, their flexible, dynamic type systems easily become the source of inefficiency in terms of instruction count, memory footprint, and energy consumption. This overhead makes it challenging to deploy these high-productivity programming technologies on emerging single-board computers for IoT applications. Addressing this challenge, this paper introduces Typed Architectures, a high-efficiency, low-cost execution substrate for dynamic scripting languages, where each data variable retains high-level type information at an ISA level. Typed Architectures calculate and check the dynamic type of each variable implicitly in hardware, rather than explicitly in software, hence significantly reducing instruction count for dynamic type checking. Besides, Typed Architectures introduce polymorphic instructions (e.g., xadd), which are bound to the correct native instruction at runtime within the pipeline (e.g., add or fadd) to efficiently implement polymorphic operators. Finally, Typed Architectures provide hardware support for flexible yet efficient type tag extraction and insertion, capturing common data layout patterns of tag-value pairs. Our evaluation using a fully synthesizable RISC-V RTL design on FPGA shows that Typed Architectures achieve geomean speedups of 11.2% and 9.9% with maximum speedups of 32.6% and 43.5% for two production-grade scripting engines for JavaScript and Lua, respectively. Moreover, Typed Architectures improve the energy-delay product (EDP) by 19.3% for JavaScript and 16.5% for Lua with an area overhead of 1.6% at a 40nm technology node.

### Session 3A: Memory I

#### Failure-Atomic Slotted Paging for Persistent Memory :star:
The slotted-page structure is a database page format commonly used for managing variable-length records. In this work, we develop a novel "failure-atomic slotted page structure" for persistent memory that leverages byte addressability and durability of persistent memory to minimize redundant write operations used to maintain consistency in traditional database systems. Failure-atomic slotted paging consists of two key elements: (i) in-place commit per page using hardware transactional memory and (ii) slot header logging that logs the commit mark of each page. The proposed scheme is implemented in SQLite and compared against NVWAL, the current state-of-the-art scheme. Our performance study shows that our failure-atomic slotted paging shows optimal performance for database transactions that insert a single record. For transactions that touch more than one database page, our proposed slot-header logging scheme minimizes the logging overhead by avoiding duplicating pages and logging only the metadata of the dirty pages. Overall, we find that our failure-atomic slotted-page management scheme reduces database logging overhead to 1/6 and improves query response time by up to 33% compared to NVWAL.

#### What Scalable Programs Need from Transactional Memory
Transactional memory (TM) has been the focus of numerous studies, and it is supported in processors such as the IBM Blue Gene/Q and Intel Haswell. Many studies have used the STAMP benchmark suite to evaluate their designs. However, the speedups obtained for the STAMP benchmarks on all TM systems we know of are quite limited; for example, with 64 threads on the IBM Blue Gene/Q, we observe a median speedup of 1.4X using the Blue Gene/Q hardware transactional memory (HTM), and a median speedup of 4.1X using a software transactional memory (STM).

What limits the perforance of these benchmarks on TMs? In this paper, we argue that the problem lies with the programming model and data structures used to write them. To make this point, we articulate two principles that we believe must be embodied in any scalable program and argue that STAMP programs violate both of them. By modifying the STAMP programs to satisfy both principles, we produce a new set of programs that we call the Stampede suite. Its median speedup on the Blue Gene/Q is 8.0X when using an STM. The two principles also permit us to simplify the TM design. Using this new STM with the Stampede benchmarks, we obtain a median speedup of 17.7X with 64 threads on the Blue Gene/Q and 13.2X with 32 threads on an Intel Westmere system.

These results suggest that HTM and STM designs will benefit if more attention is paid to the division of labor between application programs, systems software, and hardware.

#### TriCheck: Memory Model Verification at the Trisection of Software, Hardware, and ISA
Memory consistency models (MCMs) which govern intermodule interactions in a shared memory system, are a significant, yet often under-appreciated, aspect of system design. MCMs are defined at the various layers of the hardwaresoftware stack, requiring thoroughly verified specifications, compilers, and implementations at the interfaces between layers. Current verification techniques evaluate segments of the system stack in isolation, such as proving compiler mappings from a high-level language (HLL) to an ISA or proving validity of a microarchitectural implementation of an ISA. This paper makes a case for full-stack MCM verification and provides a toolflow, TriCheck, capable of verifying that the HLL, compiler, ISA, and implementation collectively uphold MCM requirements. The work showcases TriCheck’s ability to evaluate a proposed ISA MCM in order to ensure that each layer and each mapping is correct and complete. Specifically, we apply TriCheck to the open source RISCV ISA [55], seeking to verify accurate, efficient, and legal compilations from C11. We uncover under-specifications and potential inefficiencies in the current RISC-V ISA documentation and identify possible solutions for each. As an example, we find that a RISC-V-compliant microarchitecture allows 144 outcomes forbidden by C11 to be observed out of 1,701 litmus tests examined. Overall, this paper demonstrates the necessity of full-stack verification for detecting MCM-related bugs in the hardware-software stack.

#### An Analysis of Persistent Memory Use with WHISPER
Emerging non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies promise durability with read and write latencies comparable to volatile memory (DRAM). We define Persistent Memory (PM) as NVM accessed with byte addressability at low latency via normal memory instructions. Persistent-memory applications ensure the consistency of persistent data by inserting ordering points between writes to PM allowing the construction of higher-level transaction mechanisms. An epoch is a set of writes to PM between ordering points.
To put systems research in PM on a firmer footing, we developed and analyzed a PM benchmark suite called WHISPER that comprises ten PM applications we gathered to cover all current interfaces to PM. A quantitative analysis reveals several insights: (a) only 4% of writes in PM-aware applications are to PM and the rest are to volatile memory, (b) software transactions are often implemented with 5 to 50 ordering points (c) 75% of epochs update exactly one 64B cache line, (d) 80% of epochs from the same thread depend on previous epochs from the same thread, while few epochs depend on epochs from other threads. Based on our analysis, we propose the Hands-off Persistence System (HOPS) to track updates to PM in hardware. Current hardware design requires applications to force data to PM as each epoch ends. HOPS provides high-level ISA primitives for applications to express durability and ordering constraints separately and enforces them automatically, while achieving 24.3% better performance over current approaches to persistence.

