---
layout: article
title: Papers on ISCA 2018
key: 20189161
lang: en
tags: [ISCA, papers]
modify_date: 2018-9-16
---

## The 45th International Symposium on Computer Architecture - ISCA 2018

<!--more-->

### Session 1A: Clouds & Datacenters

#### A Configurable Cloud-Scale DNN Processor for Real-Time AI

Interactive AI-powered services require low-latency evaluation of deep neural network (DNN) models-aka ""real-time AI"". The growing demand for computationally expensive, state-of-the-art DNNs, coupled with diminishing performance gains of general-purpose architectures, has fueled an explosion of specialized Neural Processing Units (NPUs). NPUs for interactive services should satisfy two requirements: (1) execution of DNN models with low latency, high throughput, and high efficiency, and (2) flexibility to accommodate evolving state-of-the-art models (e.g., RNNs, CNNs, MLPs) without costly silicon updates. This paper describes the NPU architecture for Project Brainwave, a production-scale system for real-time AI. The Brainwave NPU achieves more than an order of magnitude improvement in latency and throughput over state-of-the-art GPUs on large RNNs at a batch size of 1. The NPU attains this performance using a single-threaded SIMD ISA paired with a distributed microarchitecture capable of dispatching over 7M operations from a single instruction. The spatially distributed microarchitecture, scaled up to 96,000 multiply-accumulate units, is supported by hierarchical instruction decoders and schedulers coupled with thousands of independently addressable high-bandwidth on-chip memories, and can transparently exploit many levels of fine-grain SIMD parallelism. When targeting an FPGA, microarchitectural parameters such as native datapaths and numerical precision can be "synthesis specialized" to models at compile time, enabling atypically high FPGA performance competitive with hardened NPUs. When running on an Intel Stratix 10 280 FPGA, the Brainwave NPU achieves performance ranging from ten to over thirty-five teraflops, with no batching, on large, memory-intensive RNNs.

#### Virtual Melting Temperature: Managing Server Load to Minimize Cooling Overhead with Phase Change materials

As the power density and power consumption of large scale datacenters continue to grow, the challenges of removing heat from these datacenters and keeping them cool is an increasingly urgent and costly. With the largest datacenters now exceeding over 200 MW of power, the cooling systems that prevent overheating cost on the order of tens of millions of dollars. Prior work proposed to deploy phase change materials (PCM) and use Thermal Time Shifting (TTS) to reshape the thermal load of a datacenter by storing heat during peak hours of high utilization and releasing it during off hours when utilization is low, enabling a smaller cooling system to handle the same peak load. The peak cooling load reduction enabled by TTS is greatly beneficial, however TTS is a passive system that cannot handle many workload mixtures or adapt to changing load or environmental characteristics. In this work we propose VMT, a thermal aware job placement technique that adds an active, tunable component to enable greater control over datacenter thermal output. We propose two different job placement algorithms for VMT and perform a scale out study of VMT in a simulated server cluster. We provide analysis of the use cases and trade-offs of each algorithm, and show that VMT reduces peak cooling load by up to 12.8% to provide over two million dollars in cost savings when a smaller cooling system is installed, or allows for over 7,000 additional servers to be added in scenarios where TTS is ineffective. 

#### FireSim: FPGA-Accelerated Cycle-Exact Scale-Out System Simulation in the Public Cloud  

We present FireSim, an open-source simulation platform that enables cycle-exact microarchitectural simulation of large scale-out clusters by combining FPGA-accelerated simulation of silicon-proven RTL designs with a scalable, distributed network simulation. Unlike prior FPGA-accelerated simulation tools, FireSim runs on Amazon EC2 F1, a public cloud FPGA platform, which greatly improves usability, provides elasticity, and lowers the cost of large-scale FPGA-based experiments. We describe the design and implementation of FireSim and show how it can provide sufficient performance to run modern applications at scale, to enable true hardware-software co-design. As an example, we demonstrate automatically generating and deploying a target cluster of 1,024 3.2 GHz quad-core server nodes, each with 16 GB of DRAM, interconnected by a 200 Gbit/s network with 2 microsecond latency, which simulates at a 3.4 MHz processor clock rate (less than 1,000x slowdown over real-time). In aggregate, this FireSim instantiation simulates 4,096 cores and 16 TB of memory, runs ~ 14 billion instructions per second, and harnesses 12.8 million dollars worth of FPGAs-at a total cost of only ~ $100 per simulation hour to the user. We present several examples to show how FireSim can be used to explore various research directions in warehouse-scale machine design, including modeling networks with high-bandwidth and low-latency, integrating arbitrary RTL designs for a variety of commodity and specialized datacenter nodes, and modeling a variety of datacenter organizations, as well as reusing the scale-out FireSim infrastructure to enable fast, massively parallel cycle-exact single-node microarchitectural experimentation.

### Session 1B: Accelerators for Emerging Apps

#### PROMISE: An End-to-End Design of a Programmable Mixed-Signal Accelerator for Machine-Learning Algorithms

Analog/mixed-signal machine learning (ML) accelerators exploit the unique computing capability of analog/mixed-signal circuits and inherent error tolerance of ML algorithms to obtain higher energy efficiencies than digital ML accelerators. Unfortunately, these analog/mixed-signal ML accelerators lack programmability, and even instruction set interfaces, to support diverse ML algorithms or to enable essential software control over the energy-vs-accuracy tradeoffs. We propose PROMISE, the first end-to-end design of a PROgrammable MIxed-Signal accElerator from Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) to high-level language compiler for acceleration of diverse ML algorithms. We first identify prevalent operations in widely-used ML algorithms and key constraints in supporting these operations for a programmable mixed-signal accelerator. Second, based on that analysis, we propose an ISA with a PROMISE architecture built with silicon-validated components for mixed-signal operations. Third, we develop a compiler that can take a ML algorithm described in a high-level programming language (Julia) and generate PROMISE code, with an IR design that is both language-neutral and abstracts away unnecessary hardware details. Fourth, we show how the compiler can map an application-level error tolerance specification for neural network applications down to low-level hardware parameters (swing voltages for each application Task) to minimize energy consumption. Our experiments show that PROMISE can accelerate diverse ML algorithms with energy efficiency competitive even with fixed-function digital ASICs for specific ML algorithms, and the compiler optimization achieves significant additional energy savings even for only 1% extra errors.

#### Computation Reuse in DNNs by Exploiting Input Similarity

In recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved tremendous success for diverse problems such as classification and decision making. Efficient support for DNNs on CPUs, GPUs and accelerators has become a prolific area of research, resulting in a plethora of techniques for energy-efficient DNN inference. However, previous proposals focus on a single execution of a DNN. Popular applications, such as speech recognition or video classification, require multiple back-to-back executions of a DNN to process a sequence of inputs (e.g., audio frames, images). In this paper, we show that consecutive inputs exhibit a high degree of similarity, causing the inputs/outputs of the different layers to be extremely similar for successive frames of speech or images of a video. Based on this observation, we propose a technique to reuse some results of the previous execution, instead of computing the entire DNN. Computations related to inputs with negligible changes can be avoided with minor impact on accuracy, saving a large percentage of computations and memory accesses. We propose an implementation of our reuse-based inference scheme on top of a state-of-the-art DNN accelerator. Results show that, on average, more than 60% of the inputs of any neural network layer tested exhibit negligible changes with respect to the previous execution. Avoiding the memory accesses and computations for these inputs results in 63% energy savings on average.

#### GenAx: A Genome Sequencing Accelerator

Genomics can transform health-care through precision medicine. Plummeting sequencing costs would soon make genome testing affordable to the masses. Compute efficiency, however, has to improve by orders of magnitude to sequence and analyze the raw genome data. Sequencing software used today can take several hundreds to thousands of CPU hours to align reads to a reference sequence. This paper presents GenAx, an accelerator for read alignment, a time-consuming step in genome sequencing. It consists of a seeding and seed-extension accelerator. The latter is based on an innovative automata design that was designed from the ground-up to enable hardware acceleration. Unlike conventional Levenshtein automata, it is string independent and scales quadratically with edit distance, instead of string length. It supports critical features commonly used in sequencing such as affine gap scoring and traceback. GenAx provides a throughput of 4,058K reads/s for Illumina 101 bp reads. GenAx achieves 31.7× speedup over the standard BWA-MEM sequence aligner running on a 56-thread dualsocket 14-core Xeon E5 server processor, while reducing power consumption by 12× and area by 5.6×.


### Session 2A: Prefetching

#### Division of Labor: A More Effective Approach to Prefetching

Prefetching is a central component in most microarchitectures. Many different algorithms have been proposed with varying degrees of complexity and effectiveness. There are inherent tradeoffs among various metrics especially when we try to exploit both simpler access patterns and more complex ones simultaneously. Hypothetically, therefore, it is better to have collaboration of sub-components each specialized in exploiting a different access pattern than to have a monolithic design trying to have a similar prefetching scope. In this paper, we present some empirical evidence.We use a few components dedicated for some simple patterns such as canonical strided accesses. We show that a composite prefetcher with these components can significantly out-perform state-of-the-art prefetchers. But more importantly, the composite prefetcher achieves better performance through a more limited prefetching scope while attaining a much higher accuracy. This suggests that the design can be more readily expanded with additional components targeting other patterns.

#### Critically Aware Tiered Cache Hierachy: A fundamental relook at multi-level cache hierarchies

On-die caches are a popular method to help hide the main memory latency. However, it is difficult to build large caches without substantially increasing their access latency, which in turn hurts performance. To overcome this difficulty, on-die caches are typically built as a multi-level cache hierarchy. One such popular hierarchy that has been adopted by modern microprocessors is the three level cache hierarchy. Building a three level cache hierarchy enables a low average hit latency since most requests are serviced from faster inner level caches. This has motivated recent microprocessors to deploy large level-2 (L2) caches that can help further reduce the average hit latency.
In this paper, we do a fundamental analysis of the popular three level cache hierarchy and understand its performance delivery using program criticality. Through our detailed analysis we show that the current trend of increasing L2 cache sizes to reduce average hit latency is, in fact, an inefficient design choice. We instead propose Criticality Aware Tiered Cache Hierarchy (CATCH) that utilizes an accurate detection of program criticality in hardware and using a novel set of inter-cache prefetchers ensures that on-die data accesses that lie on the critical path of execution are served at the latency of the fastest level-1 (L1) cache. The last level cache (LLC) serves the purpose of reducing slow memory accesses, thereby making the large L2 cache redundant for most applications. The area saved by eliminating the L2 cache can then be used to create more efficient processor configurations. Our simulation results show that CATCH outperforms the three level cache hierarchy with a large 1 MB L2 and exclusive LLC by an average of 8.4%, and a baseline with 256 KB L2 and inclusive LLC by 10.3%. We also show that CATCH enables a powerful framework to explore broad chip-level area, performance and power tradeoffs in cache hierarchy design. Supported by CATCH, we evaluate radical architecture directions such as eliminating the L2 altogether and show that such architectures can yield 4.5% performance gain over the baseline at nearly 30% lesser area or improve the performance by 7.3% at the same area while reducing energy consumption by 11%.

#### Rethinking Belady's Algorithm to Accommodate Prefetching

This paper shows that in the presence of data prefetchers, cache replacement policies are faced with a large unexplored design space. In particular, we observe that while Belady’s MIN algorithm minimizes the total number of cache misses—including those for prefetched lines—it does not minimize the number of demand misses. To address this shortcoming, we introduce Demand-MIN, a variant of Belady’s algorithm that minimizes the number of demand misses at the cost of increased prefetcher traffic. Together, MIN and Demand-MIN define the boundaries of an important design space, with many intermediate points lying between them.
To reason about this design space, we introduce a simple
conceptual framework, which we use to define a new cache
replacement policy called Harmony. Our empirical evaluation shows that for a mix of SPEC 2006 benchmarks running on a 4-core system with a stride prefetcher, Harmony improves IPC by 7.7% over an LRU baseline, compared to 3.7% for the previous state-of-the-art. On an 8-core system, Harmony improves IPC by 9.4% compared to 4.4% for the previous state-of-the-art.

### Session 2B: Languages & Models

### Session 3A: Virtual Memory

### Session 3B: Coherence & Memory Ordering

### Session 4A: Emerging Paradigms

### Session 4B: Persistence

### Session 5A: Emerging Memory 1

### Session 5B: Storage

### Session 6A: Emerging Memory 2

### Session 6B: Controllers & Control Systems

### Session 7A: Mobile Platforms

### Session 7B: Security

### Session 8A: Machine Learning Systems 1

### Session 8B: Interconnection Networks

### Session 9A: Machine Learning Systems 2

### Session 9B: GPUs


